Issue #486: Clarify interpretation of physical qubits (#498)
openqasm/openqasm: source/language/types.rst

   qubit γ;
   // Declare a qubit register with 20 qubits
   qubit[20] qubit_array;

.. _physical-qubits:

Physical Qubits
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Physical qubits refer to particular hardware qubits. Therefore, they are only fully defined with
respect to a target device that has a published device topology. The hardware provider determines
the integer-labels associated with each qubit within the device's topology.

While virtual qubits can be named, hardware qubits are referenced by the syntax ``$[NUM]``, where
``NUM`` is a non-negative integer. Any integer included in the published device topology is a valid
physical qubit identifier. Note that this implies that physical qubit identifier indices may be
non-consecutive, depending on the device.

Like virtual qubits, physical qubits are global variables, but unlike virtual qubits, they must
not be declared.

> These qubit types are often used for ``defcal`` blocks because calibrations are typically valid

Reviewer: Just to clarify, defined calibrations apply only to physical qubits (cf. https://openqasm.com/language/pulses.html). The OpenQASM spec allows for a family of calibrations to be defined using a shorthand syntax, like `defcal rz(angle theta) q { ... }` but technically the `q` here is not a virtual qubit -- it's a kind of formal parameter.

> One can define a defcal using a regular identifier for a qubit, which causes that calibration definition to be valid for all physical qubits. This is most likely to be useful for gates that are implemented virtually.

Author: Awesome, will update.

> particular set of physical qubits. See also :ref:`pulse gates <pulse-gates>`.

Reviewer 2: *These qubit types* (which is copied from the previous text) should be *This qubit type*. But I think it would be better to make this even more precise. It's not clear to me what the sentence means, in particular *used for*. Does it mean that the qubit parameters in a `defcal` declaration must be physical qubits? Or that the qubit arguments in a gate call that dispatches to a `defcal` "method" must be physical qubits? And/or that the qubits appearing in the body of a `defcal` declaration must be physical qubits?

I guess that it would be easier and more automatic to write precise and concise statements if we had an unambiguous language to talk about the language elements. For example, using the conventional programming language distinction between *parameter* and *argument*. The spec makes this distinction sometimes, but not always. Pursuing this observation belongs in another issue, but I think we could still make an improvement to this text.

Physical qubits cannot be used in ``gate`` statements. See also
:ref:`gate definitions <gate-statement>`.

Physical qubits are also used in lower parts of the compilation stack when emitting physical
circuits. A physical circuit is one which only references physical qubits, and every operation
used in the circuit has an associated ``defcal``, which we refer to as hardware-native gates and
measurements.

.. code-block::

   // CNOT gate between physical qubits 0 and 1
   CX $0, $1;
   // Define the pulse-level instruction sequence for ``h`` on physical qubit 0
   defcal h $0 { ... }

Physical qubit constraints
..........................

Physical qubits, by definition, reference particular hardware qubits. Circuit equivalence does not

> hold over permutations of physical qubit labels. Thus, physical qubits cannot be remapped by a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hold over permutations of physical qubit labels. Thus, physical qubits should not be remapped by a
```

> .. TODO: Can physical qubits be used in a ``defgate``? My answer would be no.

Author: Update: Erik gave a good argument for why it would be possible, so I'm inclined to revise this.

hold over permutations of physical qubit labels. Thus, physical qubits cannot be remapped by a
compiler or hardware provider without opt-in from the programmer.

Note that while physical circuits require physical qubits, the converse need not be true. A circuit
that would require routing or gate decomposition to run (i.e., does not have a ``defcal`` for every
operation in the circuit) would by definition not be a physical circuit. However, physical qubits
can still be used in such circuits.

> For example, a program defines the ``H`` gate with the ``gate`` statement. ``H`` is therefore a
> supported gate, but not a hardware-native gate. The compiler can decompose the statement ``H $0;``
> to hardware-native gates, while still respecting strict qubit mapping.

Reviewer 3: A gate can (and often will have both a `defcal` and a `gate` definition. The `defcal` gives the physical implementation and the `gate` specifies the ideal unitary. I think we fix keep this para like this

```suggestion
For example, a program defines the ``H`` gate with the ``gate`` statement,
without a corresponding ``defcal`` of ``H``. ``H`` is therefore a
supported gate, but not a hardware-native gate. The compiler can decompose the statement ``H $0;``
to hardware-native gates, while still respecting strict qubit mapping.
```
